README.md, before:

# spark

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/je-nunez/spark.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/je-nunez/spark)

Some tests with clustering in Apache Spark in local mode

# WIP

This project is a *work in progress*. The implementation is *incomplete* and subject to change. The documentation can be inaccurate.

# Description

It tries to do a K-Means clustering using Apache Spark in Scala on data from the [The Center for Microeconomic Data of the Federal Reserve of New York](https://www.newyorkfed.org/microeconomics/index.html). In particular, from the Excel workbook [2014 Housing Survey](https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/interactives/sce/sce/downloads/data/FRBNY-SCE-Housing-Module-Public-Microdata-Complete.xlsx), available under [https://www.newyorkfed.org/microeconomics/data.html](https://www.newyorkfed.org/microeconomics/data.html).

The clustering tries to increase different cardinalities in the set of clusters, and to compare each set according to the measure of its `Within Set Sum of Squared Errors`.

**Note**: The program tries to download the Excel workbook of the `2014 Housing Survey` directly, so it depends on the availability of the link [https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/interactives/sce/sce/downloads/data/FRBNY-SCE-Housing-Module-Public-Microdata-Complete.xlsx](https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/interactives/sce/sce/downloads/data/FRBNY-SCE-Housing-Module-Public-Microdata-Complete.xlsx).

# Example Output

The output reported by this program is the set of clusters found, for example, reporting one cluster *<#i>*, for some integer *i*:

     Reporting center of KMeans cluster <#i>
       ...
       ... value of the columns of the K-means center in this cluster <#i>...
       ...
     Number for non-zero columns for center of KMeans cluster <#i>: <#number-non-zero-columns>

where the value of the columns have the column index, the column name, the value of that column in the K-means center, and the description of that column.

For example:

     Reporting center of KMeans cluster 0
     ...
     Column 117 HQH6a         value:  0.55962734 Last refinanced mortgage on primary residence
     Column 118 HQH6a2_1      value:  0.70164064 Terms changed when last refinanced: The interest rate was lowered
     Column 121 HQH6a2_4      value:  0.61233999 Terms changed when last refinanced: The term of the mortgage decreased
     Column 124 HQH6a2_7      value:  0.52907140 Terms changed when last refinanced: Changed mortgage servicer
     Column 154 HQH6a3part2_1 value: -0.02503919 Magnitude of change in monthly payment
     Column 156 HQH6a4_2      value:  0.13441488 Use of money from decreased monthly payment: Paid down other debt (e.g. on credit cards, auto loans, student loans, or medical bills)
     Column 158 HQH6a4_4      value:  0.10726969 Use of money from decreased monthly payment: Used it to make renovations or improvements to the home
     Column 159 HQH6a4_5      value:  0.30495740 Use of money from decreased monthly payment: Used it to pay for other expenses
     Column 160 HQH6a4_6      value:  0.46714597 Use of money from decreased monthly payment: Used it to purchase financial assets (e.g. stocks)
     Column 163 HQH6b_1       value:  0.72465210 Percent chance will refinance over next 12 months
     ...
     Number for non-zero columns for center of KMeans cluster 0: 175

Note in the sample above that the columns indexed 119, 120, 122, 123, 125 to 153, 155, 157, 161 and 162, do not appear in the center of this cluster 0 found, because their value in this center is 0.0, so they are omitted in the report for the sake of brevity.

Commit message:

a minor note in output reported

README.md, after:

# spark

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/je-nunez/spark.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/je-nunez/spark)

Some tests with clustering in Apache Spark in local mode

# WIP

This project is a *work in progress*. The implementation is *incomplete* and subject to change. The documentation can be inaccurate.

# Description

It tries to do a K-Means clustering using Apache Spark in Scala on data from the [The Center for Microeconomic Data of the Federal Reserve of New York](https://www.newyorkfed.org/microeconomics/index.html). In particular, from the Excel workbook [2014 Housing Survey](https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/interactives/sce/sce/downloads/data/FRBNY-SCE-Housing-Module-Public-Microdata-Complete.xlsx), available under [https://www.newyorkfed.org/microeconomics/data.html](https://www.newyorkfed.org/microeconomics/data.html).

The clustering tries to increase different cardinalities in the set of clusters, and to compare each set according to the measure of its `Within Set Sum of Squared Errors`.

**Note**: The program tries to download the Excel workbook of the `2014 Housing Survey` directly, so it depends on the availability of the link [https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/interactives/sce/sce/downloads/data/FRBNY-SCE-Housing-Module-Public-Microdata-Complete.xlsx](https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/interactives/sce/sce/downloads/data/FRBNY-SCE-Housing-Module-Public-Microdata-Complete.xlsx).

# Example Output

The output reported by this program is the set of clusters found, for example, reporting one cluster *<#i>*, for some integer *i*:

     Reporting center of KMeans cluster <#i>
       ...
       ... value of the columns of the K-means center in this cluster <#i>...
       ...
     Number for non-zero columns for center of KMeans cluster <#i>: <#number-non-zero-columns>

where the value of the columns have the column index, the column name, the value of that column in the K-means center, and the description of that column.

For example:

     Reporting center of KMeans cluster 0
     ...
     Column 117 HQH6a         value:  0.55962734 Last refinanced mortgage on primary residence
     Column 118 HQH6a2_1      value:  0.70164064 Terms changed when last refinanced: The interest rate was lowered
     Column 121 HQH6a2_4      value:  0.61233999 Terms changed when last refinanced: The term of the mortgage decreased
     Column 124 HQH6a2_7      value:  0.52907140 Terms changed when last refinanced: Changed mortgage servicer
     Column 154 HQH6a3part2_1 value: -0.02503919 Magnitude of change in monthly payment
     Column 156 HQH6a4_2      value:  0.13441488 Use of money from decreased monthly payment: Paid down other debt (e.g. on credit cards, auto loans, student loans, or medical bills)
     Column 158 HQH6a4_4      value:  0.10726969 Use of money from decreased monthly payment: Used it to make renovations or improvements to the home
     Column 159 HQH6a4_5      value:  0.30495740 Use of money from decreased monthly payment: Used it to pay for other expenses
     Column 160 HQH6a4_6      value:  0.46714597 Use of money from decreased monthly payment: Used it to purchase financial assets (e.g. stocks)
     Column 163 HQH6b_1       value:  0.72465210 Percent chance will refinance over next 12 months
     ...
     Number for non-zero columns for center of KMeans cluster 0: 175
     ... [the centers of the other clusters, cluster 1 and so on, reported below] ...

Note in the sample above that the columns indexed 119, 120, 122, 123, 125 to 153, 155, 157, 161 and 162, do not appear in the center of this cluster 0 found, because their value in this center is 0.0, so they are omitted in the report for the sake of brevity.
